Here is a rough exercise sketch.

The idea is to:
(i) setup a simulation where one can sample from some causal model
(ii) implement the LCD algorithm to discover causal relations
(iii) evaluate the accuracy of the results (comparing to the true model)

To avoid diverging answers that lead to difficult grading, we can
specify all kinds of details. For example, how the simulation should
be done. 

One version could be:

i) Implement the ASIA network, which is a toy example causal Bayesian network
whose specification e.g. can be found at https://www.bayesserver.com/examples/networks/asia
In particular: implement a sampler from that causal Bayes net in R.
Generate 10000 samples with your sampler.
(The idea would be to make an ancestral sampler, so to sample in a topological ordering,
sampling each variable from its kernel p(x_i|do(pa(x_i))))

ii) Implement the G-test in R. This reduces to implementing
the G test statistic (which boils down to calculating an empirical mutual information
between two discrete variables, conditioning on a third) and to invoke the 
chi-squared quantile/cdf function. (All necessary math details will be in the lecture
notes, the required functions regarding the chi^2 distribution are readily available in R)

iii) Implement the LCD algorithm with this test. Input: a data set, a triple of variables
where the first is known not to be caused by the other two, p-value threshold. Output:
this triple fits the LCD pattern (TRUE/FALSE)

iv) Run the LCD algorithm on the sampled data from the ASIA network. Use visit-to-Asia and
smoking as context variables (i.e., those that are known not to be caused by the others).
Study the precision/recall as a function of the number of samples.
Use this to estimate the causal effect of 'has tuberculosis' on 'xray result'.

v) Run also the FCI-JCI algorithm from the pcalg package on the same data, and read out the identified ancestral
relations from the PAG it finds with the 'pag2anc' function. Again, study precision/recall as a function of the number
of samples.
